
\section{Related Work}
\label{sec:related-work}

\Klang{} is intended to represent a textual modeling language capable
of representing \sysml{} concepts, specifically class diagrams with
constraints.  However, as mentioned in the introduction, it also
contains programming constructs.  As such it can be perceived as a
wide-spectrum modeling/programming language.

Wide spectrum specification languages have been investigated to length
in the formal methods community. One of the well-known examples is
\vdm{} \cite{vdm78,bjoerner-jones-82,jones90,jones-shaw-90}. \vdm{} in
its original form \cite{vdm78} provided a combination of procedural
programming and functional programming, as well as specification using
sets, lists and maps (with proper mathematical notation), and
higher-order predicate logic. \vdmpp{} \cite{vdmplusplus05} added
object-orientation to \vdm{}, which is now part of the \vdm{}
standard. The \raiselang{} specification language (\rsl{})
\cite{raise92} is a wide-spectrum language taking inspiration from
\vdm{} as well as from other modeling languages such as \zlang{}
\cite{spivey-Z-1988}, and from algebraic equational specification
languages. Here refinement is the simpler theory implication: the
implementation shall imply the specification in a logic sense. \asml{}
\cite{asml05} is a more recent wide-spectrum specification language,
in many ways similar to \vdm{}, but based on the fundamental concept
that operations operate on algebras.  Other fundamental works on
refinement include (not a comprehensive list):
\cite{wirth-refinement-71,hoare-sanders-refinement-86,morgan-refinement-94,woodcock-sanders-z-96,back-wright-refinement-98,abrial-eventb-10}.

\alloy{} \cite{jackson-alloy-12} added new life to this community by
being supported by a automated SAT solver. In many respects, \Klang{}
is close in spirit to \alloy{}, but differs by being supported by an
automated SMT solver (in contrast to a SAT solver), resulting in a
richer set of constructs, including arithmetic, being exposed to
analysis. \Klang{} also combines a type view as found in traditional
specification and programming languages, as well as a relational view,
whereas \alloy{} is purely relational. We are of the belief that the
notion of a type is fundamental to programming as well as to
modeling. In contrast to automated provers, interactive theorem
provers such as \pvs{} \cite{cade92-pvs,pvs-website}, \coq{}
\cite{coq-website}, and \isabelle{} \cite{isabelle-website}, allow the
user to steer the proofs.  Although this allows to perform more
complex proofs, it is also requires more skills of the user, and time,
which is often a limited resource in software development projects.

Several high-level programming languages have been developed over
time, including the early \sml{} (Standard ML) \cite{standard-ml-97},
its derivative \ocaml{} \cite{ocaml}, and \haskell{}
\cite{haskell}. However, also \java{} can be considered high-level due
to its libraries of collections (sets, lists, and maps), as well as
the iterator concept. \python{} \cite{python} is close to combining
object-oriented and functional programming. \scala{} \cite{scala} does
this to the full extent. The close relationship between \scala{} and
\vdm{} is discussed in \cite{havelund-scala-vdm-12}.  \fortress{}
\cite{fortress} introduced built-in notation for sets, lists, and
maps, very much resembling the notation in \vdm{}.

Specification constructs have been introduced in programming
languages, in the form of design-by-contract (pre/post conditions +
class invariants). Examples are \eiffel{} \cite{eiffel} and
\specsharp{} \cite{specsharp}, where contracts are part of the
language. \scala{} has library functions for writing pre/post
conditions on functional programs \cite{odersky-rv10}. Finally, The
\jml{} language \cite{jml} allows to write design-by-contract
specifications for \java{} as comments. These are ignored by the
standard \java{} compiler, and therefore must be processed with
special tools. \eml{} (Extended ML) \cite{sannella-eml-97} takes a
slightly different approach to specification and formal development of
\sml{} programs.  \eml{} specifications look just like \sml{} programs
except that axioms are allowed in signatures and in place of code in
structures and functors. Some \eml{} specifications are executable,
since \sml{} function definitions are just axioms of a certain special
form. This makes \eml{} a wide-spectrum language.

Programming languages are now also being built with verification in
mind.  \dafny{} \cite{leino-lpar-2010} supports specifications that
can be used to write functional-correctness conditions for programs.
It is supported by verifier, which is implemented on top of the
\boogie{} verification engine, which itself is built on top of
\zthree.  \whythree{} \cite{filliatre-why3-2011} provides a rich
language for specification and programming, called \whyml{}, and
relies on external theorem provers, both automated and interactive, to
discharge verification conditions. A user can write \whyml{} programs
directly and get correct-by-construction \ocaml{} programs through an
automated extraction mechanism. Model checking is another form of
analysis that has been applied to programming languages.  Java
PathFinder~\cite{havelund-jpf-00,havelund-visser02} performs model
checking of Java programs. \slam{} \cite{ball2010slam2} performs
static analysis and counter-example guided abstraction refinement to
device drivers, and has been applied in a large scale industry
setting.  \spin{} \cite{holzmann-spin-2004} performs model checking of
models expressed in the \promela{} language, but can also model check
\clang{} code directly. The ABS~\cite{hahnle2012abstract} language and
system providevarious types of analysis such as resource analysis,
deadlock analysis, as well as tools to perform test generation and
formal verification.

The great improvements in model checking, static analysis, theorem
proving, and SMT solvers such as Z3~\cite{de2008z3} have all
contributed to investigating and dealing with software change. To this
effect, differential symbolic execution~\cite{person2008differential}
has been investigated for establishing equivalence between two
versions of a program. The work described in \cite{lahiri2012symdiff}
uses verification conditions and SMT solvers for detecting semantic
change between two closely related versions of a function (program),
by discovering inputs to the function that cause the outputs to
differ. The work described in \cite{godlin2009regression} deals with
regression verification and provides a technique for performing
equivalence checking of C programs, by using the older version of the
program as a specification for the new version of the program. A large
part of the inspiration for such work comes from the theorem proving
community.

An important use of \Klang{} that we have observed so far, which
differs in the way traditional verification tools are used, is that
modelers tend to use \Klang{} along with it's solving ability as a
tool for {\em discovering} the right set of constraints for their
class before introducing a change. For example, uncertainty about a
particular variable and it's potential range of valid values can be
quite common in modeling environments. Since \Klang{} helps discover
unsatisfiability, modelers use an iterative refinement technique to
discover the appropriate range of a variable for their needs. \Klang{}
in this case is providing validation before a change is completely
committed.


